As technology advances, checking references for potential candidates has changed significantly in the last five years. The broad use of modern digital solutions has brought new possibilities for recruiters to optimize their work and improve the candidate selection process (Vrontis et al., 2021). Outsourcing reference checking to third-party platforms, social media screening, employment of artificial intelligence, and a shift toward cultural fit are some of the new trends in recruitment. However, these solutions often change the recruitment process to a degree that may violate some employment-related laws. Therefore, it is essential for companies and HR managers to maintain a high degree of professional conduct and utilize new, often not sufficiently tested technologies during recruitment to maximize efficiency and minimize possible risks.With the advent of various online reference-checking platforms, recruiters can collect references digitally through automated processes. At the same time, the actual reference checking is carried out outside the company, allowing for cost-reduction, human work optimization, and diversification of specific reference-checking strategies depending on the platform. Recruitment includes preparing and posting job offers, reviewing applicants’ professional resumes, conducting interviews, and reference-checking and small companies often do not possess enough skilled workforces for such tasks (Skiba, 2020). Outsourcing can save time and resources while ensuring consistency in the feedback received, though the possibility of the recruiter losing control over the process is a potential disadvantage.

Recruitment is becoming increasingly digitized, so the strategies employed by recruiters also change by introducing new ways of approaching candidates and checking references. Social media also serves as a convenient tool for reference-checking during recruitment. Recruiters now often conduct a social media screening of potential candidates, which can provide insight into their personality, interests, and suitability for the job (Mičík & Mičudová, 2018). Outside of professional skills, social media can help recruiters determine whether the candidate would fit into the company’s culture and be productive in a particular working environment. However, recruiters must be mindful of the potential for bias and ensure that any information obtained is strictly job-related. It is imperative that online screening does not violate employment laws through discrimination by any information found in the candidates’ social media.

Some modern companies elect to use artificial intelligence (AI) to check references. AI-powered tools can analyze data from various sources to provide insights into a candidate’s work style, personality, and potential for success in a particular role (Van Esch et al., 2019). Recruiters usually compile a set of qualities to analyze for every potential employee and utilize AI algorithms to conduct reference checks on these qualities. However, despite the growing recognition of AI-assisted recruitment and candidate screening, the lack of research on the topic raises uncertainty over data security and the reliability of such approaches. The inherent unpredictability and a degree of obscurity in the operation of AI algorithms cause suspicion over the actual value of AI reference checking.

In summary, the methods for checking references in the recruitment process have evolved significantly over the last five years, with more reliance on technology, including outsourced online platforms, social media, and artificial intelligence, to analyze data. Employers must stay up-to-date with these changes to ensure that the civil and legal rights regarding data privacy and discrimination are protected during screening and reference checking. This approach will help develop a more optimized recruitment approach to ensure the best outcome for all parties.